you
have you ever noticed how the full moon
looks bigger when it's near the horizon
than when it's high overhead if so
you're not alone people have wondered
about this strange effect since ancient
times and surprisingly we still don't
have a great explanation but that's not
for lack of trying
some of the greatest minds in history
Aristotle Ptolemy da Vinci Descartes
have all wrestled with this problem and
failed to generate an adequate
explanation one of the first ideas
suggested was that the image of the moon
in the sky really is bigger near the
horizon
perhaps the Earth's atmosphere acts like
a giant lens magnifying the moon as it
rises and sets
but this explanation doesn't cut it if
anything the refraction of the
atmosphere would make the moon look
slightly smaller plus if you actually
measure the size of the visible moon at
different positions
it doesn't change at all but then why
does it still seem bigger when it's
rising this must be some kind of optical
illusion the question is which one one
explanation is the Ebbinghaus illusion
where two identical objects look
different because of the relative size
of the objects they're surrounded by
here the two center circles are actually
the same size maybe the moon looks
bigger near the horizon because it's
next to tiny trees houses and towers in
the distance but when the moon is higher
up it's surrounded by the vast darkness
of the night sky and looks tiny by
comparison
another possibility is the famous Ponzo
illusion if you've ever tried to draw in
perspective you know that the closer
something is to the horizon the smaller
you should draw it our brain compensates
automatically for this by perceiving
objects near the horizon as larger than
they actually appear the two yellow
lines in this drawing are the same size
but the upper one seems bigger because
we interpret it as receding farther into
the horizon
so between Ponzo and Ebbinghaus it seems
like we've solved the mystery of the
moon illusion but unfortunately there
are a few details that complicate things
for one thing if this was just the
Ebbinghaus effect then we would expect
the moon illusion to disappear for
pilots flying high above the clouds
since there wouldn't be any other
smaller objects near the her
Reisen but in fact pilots and sailors
out on the ocean still claim to see the
moon illusion on the other hand if it's
just our brains Auto correcting the size
of objects near the horizon then we'd
expect the moon illusion to be visible
inside a planetarium or the whole sky
including the horizon is displayed on a
spherical dome overhead studies have
shown though that this is not the case
to make matters worse it seems the moon
illusion disappears entirely if you just
bend over and look at the moon between
your legs now this is just getting
ridiculous one of the most promising
explanations today is known as
convergence micropsia our brains judge
the distance to objects and their
apparent size by the focus of our eyes
when looking at the horizon your eyes
focus far off into the distance so your
brain knows you're looking far away the
moon appears a certain size your brain
thinks it's far away which it is so you
naturally conclude the moon must be big
but when looking up at the night sky
there's nothing for your eyes to focus
on so they default to their rest focus
which is a point just a few meters away
now your brain thinks the moon is much
closer than it really is so you
naturally conclude the moon's not as big
as you thought it was rather than
explain why the moon looks so big near
the horizon convergence micropsia
explains why the moon looks so small
when overhead still not satisfied well
frankly neither are many scientists so
the debate over the moon illusion still
rages on and may continue as long as we
still see it in the night sky